                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 1 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE: 
2.0 SUPPLIER MANAGEMENT 
This procedure is in accordance with Procurement and Payment Policy 20.1.11. 
Introduction 
 
Supplier Management is a set of processes, activities, systems and information management tools that 
allows Rutgers to manage and have maximum visibility into all activities associated with a supplier. UPS 
is responsible for ensuring that all suppliers engaged by the university are properly onboarded, 
maintained, and managed in compliance with university, state, and federal requirements.  
 
Procedure Outline 
 
2.1 
New Supplier Set Up  
2.2 
Supplier Record Maintenance  
2.3 
Supplier Ethics 
2.4 
Debarred Supplier List 
2.5 
Federal Contracting and the Small Business Contracting Plan (SBSP) 
2.6 
Sustainability 
2.7 
Supplier Management Post Contract Award  
 
Definitions 
 
Corporation: An organization that is recognized as having a legal existence as an entity separate and 
distinct from its owners. Corporations are owned by their stockholders (shareholders) who share in 
profits and losses generated through the firm's operations. 
 
Employer Identification Number (EIN):  A unique nine-digit number assigned by the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) to business entities operating in the United States for the purposes of identification.  The 
EIN is also known as the Federal Tax Identification Number.  
 
Independent Contractor or Employee Determination Form (ICED): This is a prerequisite document for 
guest lecturer, honorarium, or professional services engagements, that the prospective supplier must 
complete and must be reviewed and approved by UPS or University Tax Department prior to any start of 
service. 
 
Individual Tax Identification Number (ITIN): A tax processing number only available for certain non-
resident and resident aliens, their spouses, and dependents who cannot get a Social Security Number 
(SSN).  It is a 9-digit number, beginning with the number "9", formatted like an SSN (NNN-NN-NN). 
 
 
Limited Liability Company (LLC): A organization whereby the members of the company cannot be held 
personally liable for the company's debts or liabilities. This is a hybrid entity that combines the 
characteristics of a corporation and a partnership or sole proprietorship. 
 
                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 2 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
Ownership Declaration Form: A form required to be submitted by all suppliers performing work with 
RBHS or other Rutgers units that may be Medicare reimbursable. 
 
Partnership: An organization in which two or more individuals pool money, skills, and other resources, 
and share profit and loss in accordance with terms of the partnership agreement.   
 
PaymentWorks: Self-service supplier data portal for new supplier onboarding and existing supplier 
maintenance.  
 
Procurement Approver:  Approver within UPS who will perform a general screen and review of 
invitation requests for a new Supplier or review any updates of a current supplier.  
RU Marketplace: The university online system that covers all stages of the procurement-to-payment 
process. This system provides a comprehensive approach to the provider and end user. The tool also 
allows for data analytics by measuring the effectiveness of contracts, transaction approval cycle times, 
and use of automated invoice processing. 
Social Security Number (SSN): A unique 9-digit number in the format 000-00-0000 issued to individuals 
in the United States to track Social Security benefits and for other identification purposes. 
 
Sole Proprietor: A business that legally has no separate existence from its owner.  A sole proprietorship 
is the simplest business form under which one can operate a business. The sole proprietorship is not a 
legal entity. It simply refers to a person who owns the business and is personally responsible for its 
debts. 
 
Standard Operational Procedure (SOP): A set of instructions that functionally describes the key 
procedures. 
 
Supplier: Any individual, company, corporation, partnership or sole proprietor that provides goods or 
services to the University. 
 
Tax Identification Number (TIN): An identification number used by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in 
the administration of tax laws.  The TIN is also known as the Employer Identification Number (EIN). 
Unit: A Rutgers internal department. 
University Procurement Services (UPS): The unit that processes all procurement transactions including 
requisitions and invoices, facilitates the formal bid process, and negotiates and manages contracts. 
 
W-8 Form - The IRS form that certifies foreign status and needs to be completed for any foreign individual 
(W-8BEN) or company (W-8BEN-E) when the University is making a payment to them. It is also used to 
validate a tax treaty exemption from, or a reduced rate of, withholding on certain income. 
 
W-9 Form -The IRS form which certifies a domestic taxpayers identification number.  This form is 
requested from suppliers to conform to IRS regulations.  Rutgers must have a federal tax identification 
                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 3 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
number or social security number on file for all suppliers and individuals receiving payments from the 
University and this form is used to certify those numbers. 
 
Procedures 
 
2.1 New Supplier Set-Up Process 
 
Overview 
Prior to purchasing a good or a service, units should first research and attempt to use contracted 
suppliers and suppliers already in RU Marketplace to meet their needs, before seeking to enter an 
additional supplier to the system.  If no existing suppliers can provide the good or service, a new 
supplier must be invited through PaymentWorks, and approved by UPS.  
 
Any supplier seeking to do business with or receive payment from the University must first be 
established in PaymentWorks.  
 
PaymentWorks is the University’s supplier onboarding and management platform.  It enables units to 
invite new or existing (“legacy”) suppliers who have not yet completed the onboarding process. The 
system securely collects and validates supplier information while providing visibility into the onboarding 
workflow. Once registered in PaymentWorks, suppliers can maintain their own profile, including 
address, tax, and contact information, directly within the platform. 
  
Inviting A Supplier to Register 
Before sending an invitation, units should: 
1. Confirm that no existing supplier can provide the required good or service. 
2. Search in PaymentWorks to ensure the supplier is not already registered.  
 
Important Notes:  
• 
New suppliers for promotional merchandise, apparel, signage, displays, or awards should 
not be invited or added without prior approval from the Office of Trademark Licensing 
(trademark@ucm.rutgers.edu) within University Communications & Marketing. 
• 
Suppliers performing architectural, engineering, or trade-related work (e.g., electrical, 
painting, HVAC, plumbing) should not be invited. These requests are managed exclusively 
through Institutional Planning & Operations (IP&O). 
• 
Non-PO transactions that do not involve the purchase of goods or services are not required 
to register in PaymentWorks. 
• 
The following types of payments should be processed through Candex: 
o 
Honoraria 
o 
Travel – Non-Employee 
o 
Athletics – Game Day Services 
o 
Patient Actors 
o 
Net (Print) Royalties 
 
                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 4 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
 
To invite a supplier, the unit — referred to as the “initiator” — must complete the supplier 
invitation form, which includes the following information (see PaymentWorks Training Videos 
for instructions): 
• 
Supplier name 
• 
A valid supplier email address 
• 
Good or service provided 
• 
Selection of company or individual 
• 
Personalized message (optional) – for the supplier  
• 
PO or check request supplier 
 
Once submitted, the invitation is routed to UPS for review and approval . 
 
Criteria for supplier invitation approval   
UPS will approve supplier invitations based on the following criteria: 
 
a) The supplier is not already registered in PaymentWorks.  
b) The supplier provides a good or service that cannot be sourced from an existing University-
Contracted Supplier.  
c) The supplier is not a current Rutgers student.  
d) The supplier is not a current or recently separated employee  
a. A 6-month gap is required following their last paycheck with Rutgers. 
b. The hire date must be a different calendar year. 
c. The new role cannot be the same job performed prior to leaving the university.  
e) The supplier does not qualify for a Non-PO Upload transaction.   
 
Supplier Registration Process 
Once an invitation is approved by UPS, the potential supplier will receive an email with instructions to 
create an account. After creating their account, they will receive a follow-up email to begin their New 
Vendor Registration Form.   Suppliers are required to submit the following documentation in order to 
formally register with PaymentWorks: 
 
• 
Name as it appears on the W-9 (or W-8 if foreign) 
• 
Note: W-9 must be signed and dated within the last 18 months; W-8 must be signed and dated 
within the last three years. 
• 
Address 
• 
Email address 
• 
Tax ID/SSN number 
• 
Phone number 
• 
Signed W-9 (US entity) or W-8 (foreign entity) 
 
Any missing information will result in a supplier registration being returned to the supplier for 
correction and resubmission. It is the Supplier’s responsibility to complete the registration in full and 
submit all required documentation.  Incomplete registrations will delay the onboarding process. 
 
                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 5 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
New Supplier Screening and Entry  
Once the potential supplier submits their completed registration, PaymentWorks conducts a general 
screening to include: 
 
• 
Confirm the validity of the tax identification number 
• 
Confirm that the supplier is not on the debarred supplier list (See SAM.gov) 
• 
Confirm supplier’s address is valid 
• 
Confirm the supplier record does not already exists in our supplier database   
 
Once the PaymentWorks screening is complete, UPS will also conduct an additional screening that 
includes: 
 
• 
Confirming the supplier is not a current employee or student of Rutgers 
• 
Addressing any issues identified during the PaymentWorks screening.  
 
Once this process is complete and no issues are discovered, the registration will be approved, and the 
supplier record will be added to Oracle and RU Marketplace.  Both the invitation initiator and the 
supplier will receive email notification that the supplier has been established. 
Units can verify for supplier set-up by entering the supplier name or supplier number in any requisition 
form in RU Marketplace.  Units must still follow the sourcing process (See 3.0 Sourcing) to complete the 
purchase.   
 
If an issue is discovered, employees/students, or a supplier appears on the debarred list, a member of 
the UPS will contact the supplier and invitation initiator.  
 
2.2 Supplier Record Maintenance 
 
From time to time, updates to a supplier record will be required.  For all suppliers not onboarded in 
PaymentWorks, units should invite that supplier via a PaymentWorks invitation (see 2.1 New Supplier 
Request Process) so that the supplier goes through a sanctions check.  The old record will be de-
activated once the registration has been approved and entered.  Any updates to a supplier’s information 
going forward should be made by the supplier directly via PaymentWorks. 
 
Typical changes include: 
 
• New address 
• Changes to an existing address or contact information 
• Change in name 
• De-activation due to going out of business or purchase by another company 
• Tax identification change 
• 
Note: A change in tax identification requires issuing a new PaymentWorks invitation and 
a Procurement Help Desk ticket request to inactivate the existing supplier record. 
 
                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 6 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
For suppliers already in the system but who require a change, they will submit the change in the 
PaymentWorks portal directly.   The change request will be reviewed and either approved or rejected.   
 
The Supplier Maintenance team also performs other regular maintenance activities.  Annually, the team 
will deactivate suppliers who have not had activity for at least 24 months.  If a supplier needs to be 
reactivated, the unit can submit a Help Desk ticket. Any reactivation would require the supplier to be 
registered in PaymentWorks. 
 
2.3 Supplier Ethics 
Current and prospective suppliers are prohibited from giving money, loans, credits, entertainment, 
favors, services or gifts to Rutgers employees.  Such gifts and gratuities, even if of seemingly low value, 
can give rise to a conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest.  Such gifts will be 
promptly disposed of.  If it is deemed necessary to visit a supplier site for a demonstration, the 
university pays all related expenses.  Please see Rutgers policy 40.2.12 - Gratuities, Guests, Gifts and Use 
of University Resources.  
 
2.4 Debarred Supplier List  
 
Rutgers University complies with Federal regulations that prohibit transacting or making payments to 
suppliers that are debarred or appear on a prohibited list maintained by the U.S. Federal Contractor 
Registration, or other federal agency.  This applies to all procurement and disbursement transactions 
including but not limited to suppliers, individuals, external / independent contractors or consultants, 
professional services providers, entertainers, performers, one-time lecture fees and construction related 
goods and services.   
UPS is responsible for confirming that suppliers are not on the debarred list.  No contract, agreement, 
purchase order, or payment by Rutgers is allowed at any time to such suppliers or parties. UPS will 
cancel any contracts, agreements, or purchase orders inadvertently issued, and will return unprocessed 
any invoices submitted for payment. 
 
If any current suppliers appear on the denied parties/debarred list, the following steps will be taken by 
UPS: 
1) Deactivation of the supplier in RU Marketplace/ Oracle. 
 
2) Notification to University Ethics and Compliance.  
 
3) Location of any open transactions with the supplier and notification to the unit responsible for    
       the transaction.  
 
4) Closure of any open transactions subject to the terms of any existing contracts. 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 7 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
2.5 Federal Contracting and the Small Business Contracting Plan (SBSP) 
 
As a recipient of federal funds for sponsored research, the University is required by Federal Acquisition 
Regulation (FAR 52.219-9) to prepare a Small Business Subcontracting Plan (SBSP) for each contract with 
an awarded value in excess of $700,000.  Under these plans, prime contractors and subcontractors, such 
as Rutgers, must agree to purchase a percentage of goods and services from certified Small Business 
Concerns.  Some federal agencies set specific percentage goals.   
 
The SBSP is developed jointly by the principal investigator, the unit, and the Supplier Management Unit 
within University Procurement Services. The SBSP specifies which items will be purchased from small 
business concerns, the total dollars to be spent with each small business concern, and the percentage of 
dollars budgeted for supplies and services that the purchases represent.  Once the award has been 
made, the SBSP becomes part of the contract and the principal investigator is expected to meet the 
goals set in the plan. 
 
As a federal contractor, the University is required to prepare semi-annual reports to the federal 
government of its purchases from Small Business Concerns for each contract.  The University identifies 
Small Business Concerns and include them in the performance of these subcontract plans. 
 
2.6 Sustainability 
 
Rutgers is committed to environmental stewardship by promoting the use of environmentally and 
socially responsible products, whenever possible.  From a supplier management standpoint, UPS 
collaborates with the University’s existing supplier base to identify and highlight for the campus, their 
portfolio of environmentally friendly products and services.   
 
For federal awards, UPS:  
 
• 
Guides units to purchase only items that are in compliance with Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR part 247 guidelines; 
 
For all awards, including federal awards, UPS: 
 
• 
Guides units to purchase recycled and environmentally preferable products and services, when 
practical; 
 
• 
Meets with the campus units to discuss and explore opportunities to utilize products and 
services with the greatest amount of recycled, recyclable, and post-consumer content; 
 
• 
Collaborates with existing suppliers to identify and highlight for the campus their portfolio of 
environmentally friendly products and services; 
 
• 
Identifies green and environmentally responsible products made available by our suppliers and 
pilots them within the University to validate compatibility and practicality; and 
 
                             
 
 
 
© 2025 
Rutgers University Procurement Services 
Page 8 of 8 
CAUTION:  A printed copy of this document is uncontrolled and may not be the current version. Access current version on the UPS website. 
• 
Guides units to participate in the fleet management program that complies with the U.S. 
Department of Energy’s Alternative Fuel Transportation Program (See Sourcing 3.0). 
 
 
2.7 Supplier Management Post Contract Award and Dispute Resolution 
 
UPS monitors selected major contracts to ensure compliance to all pricing, terms and conditions.  In 
addition, UPS works with these suppliers to continually develop ways to drive costs down and improve 
services for the Rutgers community.  The approach is dependent on the contract but may include: 
 
• 
Reports from the supplier regarding key performance indicators (i.e. pricing, delivery data, 
product return data, etc.) 
 
• 
Regularly scheduled meetings with the supplier (i.e. quarterly business reviews) 
 
UPS also works with units on resolving any supplier conflicts that may arise, if requested.  Units are 
encouraged to contact the appropriate Category Manager for assistance in resolving any such issue.    
 
 
 
References 
 
PaymentWorks 
Supplier Onboarding System 
 
Campus Instructions  (via Canvas) 
Supplier Maintenance Request Process Instructions 
 
Process Flowchart  (via Canvas) 
Supplier Management Process 
 
Revisions 
 
Effective Date 
Approver 
Change Reference 
Issue # 
11/2025 
M. Gower  
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
